AIM
To build a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system that retrieves relevant document chunks from a vector
database and uses an LLM to generate grounded answers.
OBJECTIVE
To understand how embeddings, vector similarity search, and LLM generation are combined to reduce hallucination
and answer questions using an external knowledge base.
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS
• Python 3.9 or above
• langchain, sentence-transformers, faiss-cpu libraries
• Hugging Face transformers (for the generator LLM)
• Jupyter Notebook / VS Code
THEORY
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) combines a retriever and a generator to answer queries using knowledge
that may not be present in the LLM's parameters. Documents are split into chunks, converted into dense vector
embeddings using a sentence-embedding model, and stored in a vector database (e.g., FAISS, Chroma, Pinecone).
At query time, the question is also embedded, and a similarity search (commonly cosine similarity or L2 distance)
retrieves the top-k most relevant chunks. These retrieved chunks are inserted into the LLM's prompt as context, and
the LLM generates an answer grounded in the retrieved evidence.
RAG mitigates hallucination, allows knowledge updates without retraining the model, and enables domain-specific
question answering over private document collections.
ALGORITHM
1. Collect and split source documents into smaller text chunks.
2. Generate vector embeddings for each chunk using a sentence-transformer model.
3. Store the embeddings in a FAISS vector index.
4. Embed the incoming user query using the same embedding model.
5. Perform similarity search to retrieve the top-k most relevant chunks.
6. Construct a prompt combining the retrieved chunks and the query.
7. Pass the prompt to an LLM to generate the final grounded answer.
SAMPLE INPUT
query = "What is RAG in AI?"
SAMPLE OUTPUT
Retrieved Context: ['Retrieval-Augmented Generation combines document retrieval with
text generation.', 'Vector databases store embeddings and support fast similarity search.']
Answer: RAG combines document retrieval with text generation using vector databases.

RESULT
A Retrieval-Augmented Generation system was successfully implemented using FAISS as the vector database,
producing answers grounded in retrieved document context.
