AIM
To develop an AI-powered assistant that generates code from natural-language descriptions and helps identify/fix
bugs in existing code using a pre-trained code-generation model.
OBJECTIVE
To understand how transformer models trained on source-code corpora (code LLMs) can automate code generation,
code explanation, and debugging tasks.
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS
• Python 3.9 or above
• Hugging Face transformers library
• Pre-trained model: Salesforce/codegen-350M-mono (or OpenAI Codex/GPT API)
• Jupyter Notebook / VS Code
THEORY
Code-generation LLMs (e.g., CodeGen, StarCoder, Codex) are transformer decoder models pre-trained on large
corpora of source code and natural-language comments. Given a natural-language instruction or a partial code
snippet as prompt, the model predicts the most likely continuation, effectively 'writing' code.
For debugging, the buggy code along with an instruction (e.g., 'Fix the bug in this function') is passed as the prompt;
the model uses patterns learned from millions of code examples to suggest corrected code or explain the likely cause
of the error.
Such AI coding assistants (similar in spirit to GitHub Copilot) significantly speed up software development by
automating boilerplate code writing and initial debugging.
ALGORITHM
1. Load a pre-trained code-generation model and its tokenizer.
2. Provide a natural-language instruction describing the required function.
3. Generate code using the model and display the output.
4. Provide a snippet of buggy code with an explicit 'fix the bug' instruction.
5. Generate the corrected code using the model.
6. Compare the buggy and fixed versions to verify correctness.
SAMPLE INPUT
Instruction: 'check if a number is prime' + buggy factorial() function initialised with result = 0
SAMPLE OUTPUT
Generated Function:
def is_prime(n):
if n < 2:
return False
for i in range(2, int(n ** 0.5) + 1):
if n % i == 0:
return False
return True
Debug Suggestion:
def factorial_fixed(n):
result = 1
for i in range(1, n+1):
result = result * i
return result

RESULT
An AI-powered assistant was successfully developed that generates correct Python code from natural-language
instructions and identifies/fixes bugs in existing code using a pre-trained code LLM.
